---
title: Disclaimer
date: 2013-04-20T20:25:40+00:00
author: n8henrie
layout: page
nav: true
---

Nothing I write, post, or say online, including all content at
[n8henrie.com](http://n8henrie.com), is intended to be taken as medical advice
(not intended to diagnose or treat any medical condition or disease, etc.). It
is for informational, educational, and entertainment purposes only. Please be
safe and consult with your physician prior to initiating or discontinuing any
type of treatment. Following advice found on the internet (or elsewhere)
without a thorough history and physical exam by a qualified professional may
lead to injury, serious disability, or death — don’t do it.

Additionally, anything I express anywhere online is my personal opinion, and it
does not reflect the sentiments of my employer(s) or any other individual or
entity. This includes but is not limited to all content at
[n8henrie.com](http://n8henrie.com), tweets by <a target="_blank"
href="https://twitter.com/n8henrie" title="Nathan Henrie (n8henrie) on
Twitter">@n8henrie</a>, and in general all content posted by me elsewhere.

Finally, I generally have no idea what I’m doing with regards to technology,
scripting, programming, etc. My only formal education in the technology world
is one high school and one 100 level class in C++. Everything else has been
haphazardly self-taught. So, if you’re going to try to implement anything I’ve
written, tweaked, or otherwise posted about… **or even if you’re not**…
_please_ be sure to have a **complete** and **tested backup** of all your
stuff. And a backup of that backup. I promise to do my best not to post
anything that will result in data loss, but I can’t promise that it won’t
happen.

**Update 20140908:** I’m starting to get interested in electronics and making a
few small projects with my Arduino and Raspberry Pi, so I thought it would be
reasonable to update my disclaimer to include electronics in the (long) list of
topics in which I have **no expertise**. I **make no guarantees** that trying
to replicate my projects or follow my instructional posts will work, and
caution that working with electronics including any and all projects or posts
detailed at n8henrie.com could result in loss of time, damage or destruction of
equipment or devices, damage or destruction of other property such as your home
(e.g. electrical fire, power outage leading to loss of refrigerated food,
etc.), or even harm to your health or those around you, possibly even death
(e.g. when working at higher voltages). I implore you to work under the
direction of someone that knows what they’re doing, because I don’t.
